.TH ACMEID 1 "2026" "acmeid 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
acmeid \- mint and verify ACME Localname IDs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B acmeid mint
.B \-t
.I TYPE
.RB [ \-p
.IR PREFIX ]
.RB [ \-l
.IR LABEL ]
.RB [ \-n
.IR LEN ]
.br
.B acmeid verify
.RB [ \-v ]
.I ID
.br
.B acmeid batch
.B \-t
.I TYPE
.RB [ \-p
.IR PREFIX ]
.RB [ \-n
.IR LEN ]
.br
.B acmeid help
|
.B acmeid version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B acmeid
generates short, sortable, checksummed local identifiers of the form
.RS
.PP
.RI [ PREFIX :] TYPE _\fI[SLUG5]TIME4RAND_N\fR\fICHK1\fR
.RE
.PP
where
.I TYPE
is a single uppercase ASCII letter,
.I SLUG5
is an optional 5-letter slug derived from a label,
.I TIME4
encodes days since 2020-01-01 UTC in Crockford Base32, and
.I RAND_N
provides 10-40 bits of entropy.  The trailing
.I CHK1
character ensures the full identifier's character values sum to
zero mod 32.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B mint
Produce a single new ID on stdout.
.TP
.B verify
Exit 0 if the argument is a syntactically valid and checksum-correct
ID (an optional CURIE-style prefix is tolerated), 1 otherwise.  With
.B \-v
also prints
.RB \(lq VALID \(rq
or
.RB \(lq INVALID \(rq.
.TP
.B batch
Read one label per line from stdin; for each, print
.RI \(lq label \et id\(rq
on stdout.  Empty input lines produce IDs without a slug.  Output is
line-buffered, so the command pipes cleanly into
.BR sqlite3 (1).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Mint a bare-type ID:
.RS
.B acmeid mint \-t C
.RE
.PP
Mint with a CURIE prefix and a label-derived slug:
.RS
.B acmeid mint \-t C \-p ex: \-l "Pitch 1.5 mm"
.RE
.PP
Mint with a wider random section (6 chars instead of 4):
.RS
.B acmeid mint \-t C \-p ex: \-l Pitch \-n 6
.RE
.PP
Round-trip through a pipe:
.RS
.B acmeid mint \-t C | acmeid verify \-v
.RE
.PP
Feed a list of labels into SQLite to populate a spine table:
.RS
.B acmeid batch \-t C \-p ex: < labels.txt \\
.br
.B "  | sqlite3 ontology.db '.import --csv /dev/stdin staging'"
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (or
.BR verify :
ID is valid).
.TP
.B 1
.B verify
only: the ID is syntactically invalid or its checksum doesn't match.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error or runtime failure (bad flags, RNG error, buffer too small).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sqlite3 (1).
.PP
docs/spec.org and docs/recipes.org in the source distribution.
